Schemeful SameSite article and updated references (#4262)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/schemeful-samesite/index.md

---
title: Schemeful Same-Site
subhead: The definition of "same-site" is evolving to include the URL scheme.
  That means links between HTTP and HTTPS versions of a site now count as
  cross-site requests. Upgrade to HTTPS by default to avoid issues where
  possible or read on for details of what SameSite attribute values are needed.
authors:
  - bingler
  - rowan_m
date: 2020-11-18
updated: 2020-11-18
hero: schemeful-samesite-hero.jpg
thumbnail: schemeful-samesite-thumbnail.jpg
alt: Two separate plates of cookies. The plates represent the different
  schemes, HTTP and HTTPS. The cookies represent cookies.
tags:
  - blog
  - privacy
  - security
feedback:
  - api
---

{% Aside %}
This article is part of a series on the `SameSite` cookie attribute changes:
- [SameSite cookies explained](/samesite-cookies-explained/)
- [SameSite cookies recipes](/samesite-cookie-recipes/)

> - [Schemeful SameSite](/schemeful-samesite)

Reviewer: There's a spelling discrepancy here, "Schemeful SameSite" is linking to "Schemeful Same-Site". Either is fine as long it's consistent. I suggest lower case "same-site" for the concept and using "SameSite" only for the cookie.

Reviewer 2: Good catch.

"Schemeful Same-Site" is the name of this change. The concept of being the same site is "same-site" and the attribute that developers add to their cookies is "SameSite".

It's all very confusing and pedantic but that's all the more reason to stay consistent with it.

Reviewer: Okay, if I understand correctly, the title is referring to "same-site" as the concept but uses title case? web.dev uses sentence case for titles, so it should be "Schemeful same-site" here but we can't be pedantic on both sides :)

Author: It is definitely a bit confusing. I've tried to ensure I'm using:

- `SameSite` when referring to the attribute
- "same-site" in prose

I would like to keep the URL as `schemeful-samesite` for consistency with the other posts. It looks like we're considering "Schemeful Same-Site" as a Proper Name though, meaning that it should be capitalised when referred to together but appears as "same-site" if we're referring just to the overall concept.

Reviewer 2: I missed this until now, sorry about that.

The feature is named "Schemeful Same-Site" which is a proper noun and should have the capitalization if possible.

> I would like to keep the URL as schemeful-samesite for consistency with the other posts
What do you mean by consistent?

{% endAside %}

[Schemeful
Same-Site](https://mikewest.github.io/cookie-incrementalism/draft-west-cookie-incrementalism.html#rfc.section.3.3)
modifies the definition of a (web)site from just the registrable domain to the
scheme + registrable domain. You can find more details and examples in
[Understanding "same-site" and
"same-origin"](https://web.dev/same-site-same-origin/#%22schemeful-same-site%22).

{% Aside 'key-term' %}
This means that the insecure HTTP version of a site, for example,
**http**://website.example, and the secure HTTPS version of that site,
**https**://website.example, are now considered **_cross-site_** to each other.
{% endAside %}

The good news is: if your website is already fully upgraded to HTTPS then you
don't need to worry about anything. Nothing will change for you.

If you haven't fully upgraded your website yet then this should be the priority.
However, if there are cases where your site visitors will go between HTTP and
HTTPS then some of those common scenarios and the associated `SameSite` cookie
behavior are outlined below.

{% Aside 'warning' %}

> The long-term plan is to [phase out support for third-party cookies
> entirely](https://blog.chromium.org/2020/10/progress-on-privacy-sandbox-and.html),
> replacing them with privacy preserving alternatives. In scenarios where you do
> set `SameSite=None; Secure` on a cookie to allow it to be sent across schemes,
> this should only be considered a temporary solution on the migration towards
> full HTTPS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The long-term plan is to [phase out support for third-party cookies
entirely](https://blog.chromium.org/2020/10/progress-on-privacy-sandbox-and.html),
replacing them with privacy preserving alternatives. Setting `SameSite=None; Secure` on a cookie to allow it to be sent across schemes should only be considered a temporary solution in the migration towards
full HTTPS.
```

{% endAside %}

You can enable these changes for testing in both Chrome and Firefox.

- From Chrome 86, enable `chrome://flags/#schemeful-same-site`. Track progress
  on the [Chrome Status
  page](https://chromestatus.com/feature/5096179480133632).
- From Firefox 79, set `network.cookie.sameSite.schemeful` to `true` via
  `about:config`. Track progress via [the Bugzilla
  issue](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1651119).

One of the main reasons for the change to `SameSite=Lax` as the default for
cookies was to protect against [Cross-Site Request Forgery
(CSRF)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/CSRF). However,
insecure HTTP traffic still presents an opportunity for network attackers to
tamper with cookies that will then be used on the secure HTTPS version of the
site. Creating this additional cross-site boundary between schemes provides
further defense against these attacks.

## Common cross-scheme scenarios

{% Aside 'key-term' %}
In the examples below where the URLs all have the same registrable domain, e.g.

> site.example, but different schemes, for example, **http**://site.example vs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
site.example, but different schemes, for example, **http**://site.example vs.
```

**http**://site.example to **https**://site.example) would previously allow
`SameSite=Strict` cookies to be sent. This is now treated as a cross-site
navigation which means `SameSite=Strict` cookies will be blocked.

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--fullbleed">
  <img src="cross-scheme-navigation.png" alt="A cross-scheme navigation
  triggered by following a link on the insecure HTTP version of a site to the
  secure HTTPS version. SameSite=Strict cookies blocked, SameSite=Lax and
  SameSite=None; Secure cookies are allowed.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption w-figcaption--fullbleed">
    Cross-scheme navigation from HTTP to HTTPS.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<table>
  <tr>
   <td>
   </td>
   <td><strong>HTTP → HTTPS</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>HTTPS → HTTP</strong>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>SameSite=Strict</code>
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>SameSite=Lax</code>
   </td>
   <td>☑️ Allowed
   </td>
   <td>☑️ Allowed
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>SameSite=None;Secure</code>
   </td>
   <td>☑️ Allowed
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>

> ### Loading Subresources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Loading subresources
```

{% Aside 'warning' %}
All major browsers block [active mixed
content](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Mixed_content)
such as scripts or iframes. Additionally, browsers including
[Chrome](https://blog.chromium.org/2019/10/no-more-mixed-messages-about-https.html)
and [Firefox](https://groups.google.com/g/mozilla.dev.platform/c/F163Jz32oYY)
are working toward upgrading or blocking passive mixed content.
{% endAside %}

> Any changes you make here should only be considered a temporary fix while your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any changes you make here should only be considered a temporary fix while you
```

third-party or cross-site cookies require `Secure`.

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--fullbleed">
  <img src="cross-scheme-subresource.png" alt="A cross-scheme subresource
  resulting from a resource from the secure HTTPS version of the site being
  included on the insecure HTTP version. SameSite=Strict and SameSite=Lax
  cookies blocked, and SameSite=None; Secure cookies are allowed.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption w-figcaption--fullbleed">
    An HTTP page including a cross-scheme subresource via HTTPS.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<table>
  <tr>
   <td>
   </td>
   <td><strong>HTTP → HTTPS</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>HTTPS → HTTP</strong>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>SameSite=Strict</code>
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>SameSite=Lax</code>
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>SameSite=None;Secure</code>
   </td>
   <td>☑️ Allowed
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>

### POSTing a form

Posting between cross-scheme versions of a website would previously allow
cookies set with `SameSite=Lax` or `SameSite=Strict` to be sent. Now this is

> treated as a cross-site POST: only `SameSite=None` cookies can be sent. You may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
treated as a cross-site POST—only `SameSite=None` cookies can be sent. You may
```

  submission resulting from a form on the insecure HTTP version of the site
  being submitted to the secure HTTPS version. SameSite=Strict and
  SameSite=Lax cookies blocked, and SameSite=None; Secure cookies are
  allowed.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption w-figcaption--fullbleed">
    Cross-scheme form submission from HTTP to HTTPS.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<table>
  <tr>
   <td>
   </td>
   <td><strong>HTTP → HTTPS</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>HTTPS → HTTP</strong>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>SameSite=Strict</code>
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>SameSite=Lax</code>
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td><code>SameSite=None;Secure</code>
   </td>
   <td>☑️ Allowed
   </td>
   <td>⛔ Blocked
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>

## How can I test my site?

Developer tooling and messaging are available in Chrome and Firefox.

From Chrome 86, the [Issue tab in
DevTools](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/issues) will
include Schemeful Same-Site issues. You may see the following highlighted for
your site:

> - Navigation Issues
>   - "Migrate entirely to HTTPS to continue having cookies sent on same-site
>     requests"
>     - A warning that the cookie **_will be_** blocked in a future version of
>       Chrome.
>   - "Migrate entirely to HTTPS to have cookies sent on same-site requests"
>     - A warning that the cookie **_has been_** blocked.
> - Subresource loading Issues
>   - "Migrate entirely to HTTPS to continue having cookies sent to same-site
>     subresources"
>   - "Migrate entirely to HTTPS to continue allowing cookies to be set by
>     same-site subresources"
>     - A warning that the cookie **_will be_** blocked in a future version of
>       Chrome.
>   - "Migrate entirely to HTTPS to have cookies sent to same-site subresources"
>   - "Migrate entirely to HTTPS to allow cookies to be set by same-site
>     subresources"
>     - A warning that the cookie **_has been_** blocked.
>     - This warning can also appear when POSTing a form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Navigation Issues
  - `Migrate entirely to HTTPS to continue having cookies sent on same-site
    requests`—A warning that the cookie **_will be_** blocked in a future version of
    Chrome.
  - `Migrate entirely to HTTPS to have cookies sent on same-site requests`—A warning 
    that the cookie **_has been_** blocked.
- Subresource loading Issues
  - `Migrate entirely to HTTPS to continue having cookies sent to same-site
    subresources` or `Migrate entirely to HTTPS to continue allowing cookies to be set by
    same-site subresources`—Warnings that the cookie **_will be_** blocked in a future 
    version of Chrome.
  - `Migrate entirely to HTTPS to have cookies sent to same-site subresources` or 
    `Migrate entirely to HTTPS to allow cookies to be set by same-site subresources`—Warnings that the cookie 
    **_has been_** blocked. The latter warning can also appear when POSTing
    a form.
```

Same-Site](https://www.chromium.org/updates/schemeful-same-site/testing-and-debugging-tips-for-schemeful-same-site).

From Firefox 79, with `network.cookie.sameSite.schemeful` set to `true` via
`about:config` the console will display message for Schemeful Same-Site issues.
You may see the following on your site:

- "Cookie `cookie_name` **will be soon** treated as cross-site cookie against
  `http://site.example/` because the scheme does not match."
- "Cookie `cookie_name` **has been** treated as cross-site against
  `http://site.example/` because the scheme does not match."

## FAQ

### My site is already fully available on HTTPS, why am I seeing issues in my browser's DevTools?

It's possible that some of your links and subresources still point to insecure
URLs.

One way to fix this issue is to use [HTTP
Strict-Transport-Security](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Strict-Transport-Security)
(HSTS) and the `includeSubDomain` directive. With HSTS + `includeSubDomain` even
if one of your pages accidentally includes an insecure link the browser will
automatically use the secure version instead.

> ### What if I can't upgrade to HTTPS?

Reviewer 3: @rowan-m & @mihajlija I have a non-blocking requested change related to this section. See https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/issues/4278

Author: Ack, good call. I can do some restructuring to tackle this and the Alex feedback.

    version of Chrome.
  - "Migrate entirely to HTTPS to have cookies sent to same-site subresources" or 
    "Migrate entirely to HTTPS to allow cookies to be set by same-site subresources"—Warnings that the cookie 
    **has been** blocked. The latter warning can also appear when POSTing
    a form.

More detail is available in [Testing and Debugging Tips for Schemeful
Same-Site](https://www.chromium.org/updates/schemeful-same-site/testing-and-debugging-tips-for-schemeful-same-site).

From Firefox 79, with `network.cookie.sameSite.schemeful` set to `true` via
`about:config` the console will display message for Schemeful Same-Site issues.
You may see the following on your site:

- "Cookie `cookie_name` **will be soon** treated as cross-site cookie against
  `http://site.example/` because the scheme does not match."
- "Cookie `cookie_name` **has been** treated as cross-site against
  `http://site.example/` because the scheme does not match."

## FAQ

### My site is already fully available on HTTPS, why am I seeing issues in my browser's DevTools?

It's possible that some of your links and subresources still point to insecure
URLs.

> One way to fix this issue is to use [HTTP
> Strict-Transport-Security](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Strict-Transport-Security)
> and the `includeSubDomain` directive. With HSTS + `includeSubDomain` even if one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way to fix this issue is to use [HTTP
Strict-Transport-Security](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Strict-Transport-Security) (HSTS)
and the `includeSubDomain` directive. With HSTS + `includeSubDomain` even if one
```

> and the includeSubDomain directive. With HSTS + `includeSubDomain` even if one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the `includeSubDomain` directive. With HSTS + `includeSubDomain` even if one
```

  the protection to `Lax`.
- In cases where both `Strict` and `Lax` cookies are being blocked and your
  cookies are being sent to (or set from) a secure URL you can lower the
  protections to `None`.
  - This workaround will **fail** if the URL you're sending cookies to (or
    setting them from) is insecure. This is because `SameSite=None` requires the
    `Secure` attribute on cookies which means those cookies may not be sent or
    set over an insecure connection. In this case you will be unable to access
    that cookie until your site is upgraded to HTTPS.
  - Remember, this is only temporary as eventually third-party cookies will be
    phased out entirely.

### How does this affect my cookies if I haven't specified a `SameSite` attribute?

Cookies without a `SameSite` attribute are treated as if they specified
`SameSite=Lax` and the same cross-scheme behavior applies to these cookies as
well. Note that the temporary exception to unsafe methods still applies, see
[the Lax + POST mitigation in the Chromium `SameSite`
FAQ](https://www.chromium.org/updates/same-site/faq) for more information.

### How are WebSockets affected?

> Websocket connections will still be considered same-site if they're the same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WebSocket connections will still be considered same-site if they're the same
```

secureness as the page.

For same-site:

>   - `wss://` ↔ `https://`

Reviewer: Accessibility tip: Could you spell out the relationship represented with this character "↔"? It's listed as "left right arrow" in Unicode which is not very helpful for anyone using a screen reader. https://www.compart.com/en/unicode/U+2194

Reviewer: *this is also the reason why I changed the check mark sign in the table to one that has a simpler name

Author: Replaced the character with explicit text.
